---
layout: post
title:  "Application loop"
date:   2022-08-30 17:30:00 +0200
categories: 3ds
---

This is part four of the [Nintendo 3DS Homebrew series.]({% post_url 2022-08-12-3ds-intro %})

This time, I will introduce the basics of the main application loop, and explain how to make the app play nicely with the OS.

We will also take a look at a debug console and how to make OS calls.

*Warning: I have not tried deploying my apps as full system apps via CIA. Some things might differ there, I will update this post if i get to that point.*

# Main loop

Entry point of the app will be a basic `main` loop, usual `int argc, char **argv` is optional - I have not used them yet.


```c
int main() {
    // code here ...
}
```

This will do nothing and will immediately quit back to the OS/HB launcher. How useful.

To actually do something of interest, we will want to add a `while` loop that will continuously spin our rendering/logic.

To play nicely with the system, use `aptMainLoop()`. It will return whether the app should keep running, so we can use it as the condition:

```c
int main() {

    // initialise subsystems here

    while (aptMainLoop()) {
        // drawing, logic, input processing
    }

    // teardown subsystems here
}
```

`aptMainLoop()` will also properly handle system sleep and home button for standalone apps.

# Console output

You can use `consoleInit` during setup to create a debug console on a screen:

```c
consoleInit(GFX_BOTTOM, NULL);
```

I suggest using the bottom screen. You can hide the init call behind a conditional to disable it when not debugging.

To actually use the console, just call a regular print function. All stdout will be piped:

```c
printf("Hello world\n");
```
```cpp
std::cout << "Hello world" << std::endl;
```

If you are not using 3D graphics (we will soon), you will need to manually init, destroy, and swap graphics to actually see something on the screen. 

The code will look roughly like this:

```c
int main() {

    gfxInitDefault();
    consoleInit(GFX_BOTTOM, NULL);

    printf("Hello World!");

    while (aptMainLoop()) {
        gfxFlushBuffers();
        gfxSwapBuffers();
        gspWaitForVBlank();
    }

    gfxExit();
    return 0;
}
```

You can see the `graphics/printing` example for more information.

# Miscellaneous

## API calls and `Result`
A lot of system-specific functionality returns a `Result` type to signal whether the call was successful, or to give a reason for failure.
You can check whether the call was valid with `R_SUCCEEDED` and `R_FAILED` macros:

```c
Result r = foo_api_call(&foo_returned_struct);

if (R_SUCCEEDED(r)) 
    do_something(foo_returned_struct);
```

`Result` carries more information than just a boolean; In case of failure, you can also query for a description of an error.

For example, you might call `R_SUMMARY(r)` to retrieve error type, for example `RD_OUT_OF_MEMORY`. See the `result.h` header for all defines.  

## Speeding up
When working on a *New 3DS* system, we most likely want to use higher clocking for free processing power. This is not enabled by default.

First, try asking if we are dealing with a *New* system:

```cpp
bool new3ds; 
Result r = APT_CheckNew3DS(&new3ds);
```

If the query was successful and the result is valid, enable the speedup:

```c
if (R_SUCCEEDED(r) && new3ds)
    osSetSpeedupEnable(true);
```

## Getting system information
The `CFGU` module can be used to get various system info. You need to initialise and destroy it (and you need to check if the init was successful):

```c
Result r = cfguInit();

if (R_SUCCEEDED(r)) {
    // perform system checks here
    cfguExit();
}
```

Then, use appropriate function to get the information you need. For example, you can query the region lock:

```c
u8 region;
Result r = CFGU_SecureInfoGetRegion(&region);

if (R_SUCCEEDED(r)) 
    // handle the region
```

See the `cfgu.h` header to check the available calls.