---
layout: post
title:  "Input and time"
date:   2023-08-10 17:30:00 +0200
categories: 3ds
---

This is part seven of the [Nintendo 3DS Homebrew series.]({% post_url 2022-08-12-3ds-intro %})

Bit of a kitchen sink this time - this post will mostly focus on getting input from the console and acting upon it. We will also talk about keeping track of the time.

# Types of input

When talking about input, we generally think about physical buttons. 

However, the 3DS also comes with a simple IMU (accelerator + gyroscope), and sliders for depth and volume. And, of course, let us not forget the touch screen on the bottom display.

## HID 
Does it stand for Human Interface Device? The HID calls are responsible for loading physical state from the mapped registers that store state of the hardware to local memory, and then querying them. Pretty much all user input will go through this interface.

No need to initialize it. Anywhere in the loop body, but preferably at the top, snapshot the input state:
```cpp
hidScanInput();
```
Now, any call (minus a few exceptions) to query state will return data at this point in time. 

## Reading buttons
We have a bunch of these available. Instead of asking for every key with a separate function, all keys are stored as a single `u32` bitfield.

To get currently held keys:
```cpp
u32 held = hidKeysHeld();
```

Alternatively, to get all keys that were pressed this frame (meaning, were not held during the last call to hid scan):
```cpp
u32 pressed = hidKeysPressed();
```

To check whether a given key was held or pressed, perform a logic test:
```cpp
if (pressed & KEY_B)
    ...
```
Check `hid.h` for other key constants.

This method also allows you to use analog pads as digital on/off d-pads, by pretending to be actual keys - see appropriate key defines.

## Analog sticks

Sticks are exposed as a pair of `s16` values that describe current deflection on an x/y plane.

To get the main circle pad position:
```cpp
circlePosition p;
hidCircleRead(&p);
printf("%i, %i\n", p.dx, p.dy)
```
This will give you values in range of about `-150..150`. You might want to rescale them to `-1..1` floats.

Keep in mind that running on emulator will always give you perfect zero-centering of the stick and consistent edge values. **Try to run this on a real console** - the stick will probably have small drift and the edges might give different values. 
Make sure to add some dead-zone correction when required.

The *New 3DS* also comes with a secondary analog stick, Thinkpad style. It is used in a similar way:<sup>1</sup>
```cpp
circlePosition p;
hidCstickRead(&p);
```

## Touchpad

The touchpad is simple. To actually know whether the screen is being touched, the scan injects a keypress into the held keys:

```cpp
if (held & KEY_TOUCH) {

    touchPosition t;
    hidTouchRead(&t);
    ...// handle the touch
}
```

The returned coordinates match the screen drawing commands. Say we want to highlight the currently pressed positon: 
```cpp
C2D_DrawCircleSolid(t.px, t.py, 1, 10, 0xffffffff);
```

## Sliders

You can query current value of the volume slider:
```cpp
u8 volume;
HIDUSER_GetSoundVolume(&volume);
```
It results in a `0..63` value. 

Please use it responsibly.

You can also read the strength of the 3d effect slider - interestingly, it seems to be separate from the hid module:
```
float angle = osGet3DSliderState();
```
It is up to you to actually use the value to control the 3d effect.

*todo: explain the use of the IMU.*

---
<sup>1</sup><sub>Except that it got shoved into the IR module memory - so it is not actually a hid call. But the hid scan also scans the ir input, so no need to scan it separately - it behaves as any other hid function.</sub>

# Keeping time
One important feature we will need when dealing with animation and logic updates is the concept of delta time - that is time taken between frames.

The api does have a bunch of functions dedicated to multiple timers, but personally I have not bothered.

The base function I use returns a `u64` count of CPU ticks since... something.

```cpp
u64 tick = svcGetSystemTick();
```
The timer runs at `SYSCLOCK_ARM11` ticks per second, which is roughly 268MHz.

If you want to store the tick as timestamp, you will need the 64 bits - as `u32` will overflow roughly every 16 seconds.

The most important time value you will need is relative time delta, which is the time in seconds between current and last frame. I measure it by comparing current tick value to previous, and dividing by the clock speed:

```cpp
u32 tick = svcGetSystemTick();
float invTickRate = 1.0f / SYSCLOCK_ARM11;

while (true) {

    u32 newTick = svcGetSystemTick();
    u32 tickDelta = newTick - tick;
    tick = newTick;

    float delta = tickDelta * invTickRate;

    ...
}
```
Here I use `u32` - as a single frame will take way less than 16 seconds, and even if the timer overflows, the difference will underflow back into correct value. Still, it probably makes little sense to optimise this on a 32-bit cpu.

It is also a good idea to specify a maximum delta - so a sudden slowdown will not generate a huge value. Any interruption (including switching to OS, closing the lid, calculations which blocks the rendering for multiple frames, etc) will at most advance the time by the worst planned case.


Here, I set the budget at 0.05ms - which is 20Hz. If your game drops below 20fps regularly, then honestly it has bigger problems.
```	cpp
if (delta > 0.05f)
    delta = 0.05f;
```

## Using delta time

Delta time allows for self-correcting simulation of the game. Every part of the game that changes with time, should use delta for timekeeping. 

For example, an entity that moves with a set velocity, will use delta time to advance its positon like so:

```cpp
e.pos.x += e.vel.x * delta;
e.pos.y += e.vel.y * delta;
```
Where positon would be in pixels, and velocity in pixels per second. 

Using delta time will automatically give you sane units and make movement consistent if the framerate drops - as entities will still get updated with a cumulative 1 unit of delta over a second.

Similarily, you can keep a total game time by incrementing a float by delta every frame - but only if the game is unpaused. Maybe you could rotate an ui element by its angular velocity multiplied by delta. Where you need to animate something over time, delta is useful.

The only exception to using delta time would be physics engines, which for stability reasons [prefer fixed time step](https://gafferongames.com/post/fix_your_timestep/). 

# Bringing it all together
The information from this post, and the 2d rendering series, should be enough to make a simple 2d game. Try to make a clone of a classic arcade game first to get a feel for organising code and assets. 

When I find some free time, I will create and dissect a small 2d game, to show how all the pieces fit together. Until then.